Kenya sickle cell: Fighting to dispel the myths around the disease

Sickle cell disease affects more people in countries in Africa than anywhere else in the world. BBC Africa Eye joined someone who helps give a voice to those with sickle cell in one town in Kenya, where nearly a quarter of the population lives with the genetic disease.

In the small town of Taveta, lodged in Kenya's Taita Hills close to the border with Tanzania, families sat on every available bench under a canopy at a local health clinic. Those who could not find space stood or sat on the grass.

"Who here has sickle cell?" asked Lea Kilenga Bey, the woman at the front, who they had all been waiting to hear from.

"All of us," they shouted in unison, meaning that they either carry the genetic mutation or are looking after someone who does.

In this busy market town at the base of Mount Kilimanjaro, with a population of just 22,000, nearly one in four of the residents have sickle cell, one of the highest rates of the genetic disease in the country.

The red blood cells of some people with sickle cell, which are normally round, are shaped like a crescent moon or a sickle, and cannot transport enough oxygen around the body. Those with sickle cell can experience episodes of severe pain sometimes lasting weeks.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), two-thirds of people affected by sickle cell worldwide live in countries in Africa.

It is the most prevalent genetically acquired disease in the region, and the survival statistics are stark.

More than half of children born with sickle cell will die before the age of five, usually from an infection or severe anaemia. Some medical journals say child mortality rates are as high as 90%.

A woman at the clinic put her hand up to ask a question.

"They say that someone with sickle cell cannot live beyond 20 years old. They only get to 15 years and most they can live is 18 years old."

Ms Bey pointed out that she was diagnosed with sickle cell at the age of six months and had survived - she is now in her 30s.

"It is a curse," another woman shouted out.

In 2017, Ms Bey founded the Africa Sickle Cell organisation, an non-governmental organisation focused on improving the lives of people with sickle cell. She regularly visits communities to spread awareness of the genetic disease, but she went back to Taveta, her hometown, to help support the people there.

"A lot of communities attribute sickle cell to ancestral curses, witchcraft," Ms Bey told BBC Africa Eye.

"This is a situation for any unknown thing in the community. People form their own stories around them. So, I had to go and tell people sickle cell is not witchcraft. It's not ancestral curses. It's something that we can solve."

One of the main challenges for people with sickle cell in Taveta, and other towns across Kenya, is access to medicine.