The woman who travelled seven hours by camel to give birth

When Mona's contractions hit, a camel became her lifeline.

Mona, 19, expected the 40km (25-mile) journey to the hospital would take four hours from her home on top of rocky mountains. But with no roads - suffering labour pains and in bad weather - it took seven hours instead.

"With every step the camel took forward, I was torn apart," she said.

When the camel could go no further, Mona dismounted and trudged the final leg of her journey on foot with her husband.

In north-west Yemen's Mahweet province, Bani Saad hospital is the only surviving health facility for thousands of women. From Mona's house, in Al-Maaqara village, the facility can only be reached through treacherous mountains on camels or by foot.

While clinging to her ride, Mona feared for her safety and that of her unborn child.

"The road was rocky," she said, recalling the "physically and mentally exhausting trip".

"There were times I prayed that God would take me away and protect my baby so I could escape the pain."

Mona has no memory of arriving at the hospital but she does remember being filled with hope after hearing her baby's cries in the hands of midwives and surgeons.

She, along with her husband, named the baby boy Jarrah after the surgeon who saved them.

The roads to the hospital from nearby villages are narrow. Some are disintegrated or blocked due to eight years of war between pro-government forces supported by a Saudi-led coalition and the Iranian-backed rebel Houthi movement.

Women, family members, or partners often assist pregnant women for hours through the hills to the hospital.

Salma Abdu, 33, who was accompanying an expectant mother, said that halfway through her journey she saw a pregnant woman who had died at night on her way.

Salma is urging people to have mercy on the women and children.

"We need roads, hospitals, pharmacies. We are stranded in this valley. Those who are lucky give birth safely. Others die, also having endured the misery of the trip," she said.

Some families can pay for the hospital but do not have the financial resources to get there.

A woman dies every two hours during childbirth from preventable causes in Yemen, according to Hicham Nahro of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in Yemen.

Mr Nahro said it was often the case that women in remote areas of Yemen did not have regular check-ups or seek help unless they started bleeding or were in severe pain.