Laura Kuenssberg: Love it or hate it, the NHS is here to stay

The British have a love-hate relationship with the NHS.

According to researchers at the King's Fund, the public gave the NHS its worst rating since records began 40 years ago. Just 29% said they were satisfied with the NHS in 2022.

And yet we still love it. A whopping 90% of the public agrees the service should be free and available to everyone.

But with more than seven million people on waiting lists, almost everyone knows someone who isn't getting the care they need.

As the NHS approaches its 75th anniversary, politicians are falling over themselves to praise the service.

But when the cameras aren't rolling, the message you hear can be a very different one. Just like us, politicians have a love-hate relationship with the NHS.

"The whole system is paralysed and not improving - all the progress is going backwards." That's not the kind of thing you're likely to hear a minister say in public but it is the candid verdict of a former health minister talking privately.

Hugh Pym: Will the plan to tackle NHS staffing shortages work?

Ministers set out plan to train and keep more NHS staff

High rate of avoidable deaths linked to NHS woes

They say the NHS chief executive has become the "rationer-in-chief" tasked with "spreading the jam more and more thinly" as the demand for care races ahead of what's available.

Another Conservative former minister tells me the "National Health Service is an oxymoron", a contradiction, because "the leadership is incredibly patchy and outcomes are mixed".

For Labour, a source says there is increasing "anxiety and jeopardy" about the future of the service and "it really is a case of change or die".

You'd be hard pressed to find a politician who would admit that services are being rationed but in off-the-record conversations that word comes up again and again.

One of the former ministers says "people have to understand that there is rationing according to wait" - saying that is the "trade-off" with the traditional model.

A former government adviser says "people know there is rationing - the service is pretty good when you get it - but you might not".

You won't find health rationing on any political leaflet or Facebook ad.

But the public's attachment to the concept of the NHS remains extremely strong. Before and after the pandemic voters are in no mood for a discussion about changing its core principles - despite all the problems.

The former government health adviser tells me that any serious conversation about fundamental change is nigh on impossible.

"Any sophisticated Tory politician knows they'd sign their own death warrant" if they raised the prospect of a wholesale change, they say.

Remember Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's proposal to fine patients if they missed a GP appointment? It was ditched almost as soon as it was suggested.