University Hospitals Birmingham: Improvements but 'a mountain to climb'

A report has found improvements at a hospital trust plagued by a culture of fear and bullying, but said there was still "a mountain to climb".

Prof Mike Bewick has been looking into University Hospitals Birmingham (UHB) after an investigation by the BBC.

The second phase of his report confirmed previous findings of a bullying culture and uncovered further concerns about misogyny and prejudice.

But he noted improvements and the trust said it was "listening and learning".

"There is a mountain to climb… but we see a trajectory of improvement," Prof Bewick said.

The trust is responsible for the Queen Elizabeth (QE), Heartlands, Good Hope and Solihull hospitals, and is one of the biggest trusts of its kind in England, employing more than 22,000 staff.

Sexual harassment
In March, the first of Prof Bewick's reports uncovered a "historical coercive bullying culture where fear and threats were used as a management tool" and in the second phase of the review, he noted "these early themes have been confirmed by this more extensive inquiry".

Other issues highlighted in his latest report, published on Friday, include claims of sexual impropriety.

He said two women had made allegations of sexual harassment and the scope of future reviews would be widened to investigate this issue further.

Another new line of inquiry came from concerns about "the integrity of data entry in cardiac surgery", which Prof Bewick said had "only recently come to light" and would be examined further.

"Serious concerns" over training were also identified in the report, with a team from Health Education England concluding training was "unsatisfactory and patient safety may be compromised" in three key areas - obstetrics and gynaecology, haematology and acute and emergency medicine.

However, it added that "active steps are now being taken to rectify these shortcomings".

Culture of fear still prevalent at Birmingham NHS trust - Bewick
Three hospital inquiries launched after BBC Newsnight probe
Birmingham hospital trust declared war on me - surgeon
Taking a closer look at the trust's governance for phase two, the author noted "significant progress" to restructure the board, which staff had criticised for its "whiteness".

This was echoed in a report from NHS England, which said that out of the thousands of staff employed by the trust, just nine people from ethnic minorities were on the most senior bands - band nine and Very Senior Manager level.

"Some changes have been implemented but there is still much work to be done to move towards a modern board role in touch with the risks the organisation faces and how it mitigates them," Prof Bewick said, adding the trust's new chair, Dame Yve Buckland, was "committed" to change.

He said staff had similarly raised concerns there were "limited job opportunities" for women and ethnic and diverse communities, saying an environment of "medical patriarchy" was "a dominant cultural determinant".