Ministers set out plan to train and keep more NHS staff

More doctors and nurses will be trained and thousands of new roles will be created to work alongside them, as part of a major NHS England workforce plan.

University places for medical students will double, a new apprenticeship scheme for doctors is planned and medical degrees could be shortened.

Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said the delayed workforce plan was "historic" and had taken time to get right.

Critics say poor working conditions in the NHS could undermine the plan.

There are more than 110,000 vacancies in the workforce at present, with one out of every 10 posts unfilled, which creates huge pressure on staff and affects the care patients receive.

The NHS has been beset by strikes this year, and the dispute with doctors is still continuing.

Pay for staff does not feature in the plan - instead, it focuses on increasing training places for medical and nursing students and a new scheme that allows trainee doctors to earn while they learn.

A consultation on whether five-year medical degrees could be shortened by a year will also be launched.

NHS staff sickness hits record high in England
NHS in England facing worst staffing crisis, MPs warn
Unveiling full details of the 15-year plan on Friday at Downing Street, Mr Sunak said it would "deliver the biggest ever expansion in the number of doctors and nurses that we train, and a plan to reform the NHS so we deliver better care in a changing world".

But he said overcoming the challenges of an overstretched workforce "won't be quick or easy".

"We're making the tough calls, and doing things differently, to protect the long-term future of the NHS and this country," Mr Sunak said.

NHS England chief executive Amanda Pritchard said the plan gave "a once-in-a-generation opportunity to put staffing on a sustainable footing for years to come".

'Dismal reality'

Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said ministers had "nicked" the opposition's plan and he criticised the delay in publishing it.

"There is a reason why the NHS is understaffed, and it's the lack of a workforce plan for the last 13 years," he said.

The Liberal Democrats said the plan had come "too late" for the millions of people who had suffered in pain or died in hospital corridors waiting for treatment.

And the Nuffield Trust think tank warned that the "dismal reality" of working in the NHS at the moment could undermine the push to tackle staff shortages in the long term.

"There is a risk that we will feed more and more people into training, only to burn them out ever faster," Dr Billy Palmer said.

